.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.TH vibeos 7 2026-07-10 "VibeOS Manual"
.SH NAME
vibeos \- VibeOS compatibility and manual-page conventions
.SH DESCRIPTION
VibeOS is a small x86-64 operating system with a Linux-compatible userspace
ABI subset.  Static musl executables and dynamically linked glibc executables
are both first-class targets.  The system stages the glibc loader at
/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 and its core DSOs under /usr/lib64.
.SH MANUAL PAGE SCOPE
The system ships selected material from the Linux man-pages project because
musl and VibeOS expose many familiar POSIX and Linux interfaces.
Section 2 is curated to interfaces recognized by the VibeOS kernel and its
overview pages are VibeOS-specific.  Retained upstream section 2 pages include
a compatibility warning.
.PP
Sections 3 and later primarily document portable C library interfaces, data
formats, protocols, and Linux concepts.  They remain useful references, but
mentions of Linux kernel versions, /proc, /sys, namespaces, cgroups, and other
Linux-only facilities do not describe VibeOS.  Static programs use musl and
dynamic programs use glibc.
.PP
Static linking is preferred for self-contained deployment, independently of
the C library choice.  A fully self-contained static glibc runtime is not
reliable because some glibc facilities retain dynamic loading requirements.
Musl is used for static executables as a compromise; glibc remains the
preferred C library for dynamically linked programs.
.SH SYSTEM LIMITATIONS
.IP \[bu] 3
The root initramfs and /usr image are read-only.  Writable ext2/ext3 mounts and
RAM-backed /home and /tmp support the implemented mutation operations.
.IP \[bu]
/proc and /sys are placeholder directories, not kernel-backed filesystems.
.IP \[bu]
Processes use Linux x86-64 syscall numbering, but threads, signals, futexes,
memory mapping, credentials, and resource limits implement only the subset
needed by current userland.
.IP \[bu]
Networking provides a small AF_INET implementation and pathname AF_UNIX stream
sockets, not the full Linux network stack.
.IP \[bu]
Timekeeping is RTC/TSC based.  getrandom(2) uses a simple internal generator
and must not be treated as cryptographically secure.
.SH PORTING
Use static, non-PIE musl binaries or dynamically linked glibc binaries.  Probe optional interfaces at
runtime and handle ENOSYS or restricted flag sets.  Consult
.BR syscalls (2)
before depending on a Linux-specific kernel API.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR intro (2),
.BR syscalls (2),
.BR intro (3),
.BR standards (7)
