@node Boot and Initialization
@chapter Boot and Initialization

@cindex boot process
@cindex Multiboot2
@cindex long mode
@findex kernel_main
@findex gdt_init
@findex idt_init
@findex mb2_find_module
@vindex MB2_MAGIC

@menu
* Link Address and Image Shape::
* Multiboot Header and Module Ordering::
* Early Long-Mode Transition::
* Kernel Initialization Sequence::
* Descriptor Tables and Exception Handling::
* Early Userspace Launch Policy::
@end menu

@node Link Address and Image Shape
@section Link Address and Image Shape

The linker script in @file{kernel/linker.ld} fixes the kernel entry image at
1 MiB:

@example
. = 1M;
@end example

It also defines:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{__kernel_start}, and
@item @code{__kernel_end}.
@end itemize

These symbols matter later to the heap initializer in
@file{kernel/src/kmalloc.c}, which verifies that the fixed heap start does not
overlap the linked kernel image.

The major output sections are:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{.multiboot},
@item @code{.text},
@item @code{.rodata},
@item @code{.data}, and
@item @code{.bss}.
@end itemize

@node Multiboot Header and Module Ordering
@section Multiboot Header and Module Ordering

The bootstrap file @file{kernel/boot/boot.asm} provides the Multiboot2 header.
That header requests:

@itemize @bullet
@item the i386-style Multiboot2 header format,
@item a framebuffer preference of 1024x768x32, and
@item the normal end tag.
@end itemize

The boot media scripts always pass two Multiboot modules after the kernel:

@enumerate
@item module 0 is the initramfs, and
@item module 1 is the @file{/usr} ext2 image.
@end enumerate

@findex initramfs_init
@findex fs_init

This ordering is not incidental.  @code{kernel_main} looks up the modules by
index and assigns fixed meanings to them.

@node Early Long-Mode Transition
@section Early Long-Mode Transition

The bootstrap path does the following in assembly:

@enumerate
@item disable interrupts,
@item switch to a temporary 32-bit stack,
@item verify long-mode support with @code{cpuid},
@item zero six pages of bootstrap page-table memory,
@item build an identity-mapped paging hierarchy for the low 4 GiB using 2 MiB
pages,
@item load a temporary 64-bit GDT,
@item enable PAE,
@item set the long-mode bit in @code{EFER},
@item load @code{cr3},
@item enable paging in @code{cr0}, and
@item far-jump into 64-bit mode and call @code{kernel_main}.
@end enumerate

This initial identity map is wider than the short README summary; the actual
source maps four 1 GiB regions through the bootstrap PDPT, not just one.

@node Kernel Initialization Sequence
@section Kernel Initialization Sequence

Once C code begins, @code{kernel_main} performs initialization in a fixed order:

@enumerate
@item console initialization,
@item ACPI power probing,
@item heap initialization,
@item initramfs discovery and indexing,
@item @file{/usr} ext2 mount attempt,
@item post-user return-stack installation,
@item VM template initialization,
@item GDT setup,
@item kernel-stack installation into the TSS,
@item IDT setup,
@item user XSAVE and FSGSBASE enablement,
@item syscall subsystem initialization, and
@item launch of the default userspace shell.
@end enumerate

The order matters.  For example, the heap must exist before the VM subsystem
allocates page tables, and the TSS kernel stack must be valid before user mode
is entered.

@node Descriptor Tables and Exception Handling
@section Descriptor Tables and Exception Handling

@findex exception_dispatch

The runtime GDT contains:

@itemize @bullet
@item a null descriptor,
@item kernel code and data descriptors,
@item user data and code descriptors, and
@item a TSS descriptor.
@end itemize

The TSS stores:

@itemize @bullet
@item the ring-0 stack pointer used on privilege transitions, and
@item a dedicated IST entry for double-fault handling.
@end itemize

The IDT installs handlers for vectors 0 through 31 and vector 128.

Exception handling is intentionally simple.  @code{exception_dispatch} prints a
register report including the vector, error code, key machine state, and
@code{cr2}, then halts the machine.  There is no attempt to recover from kernel
exceptions.

Vector 128 is reserved for the @code{int $0x80} compatibility path, while the
main syscall path uses @code{IA32_LSTAR}.

@node Early Userspace Launch Policy
@section Early Userspace Launch Policy

The launch policy after initialization is:

@enumerate
@item try @file{/usr/bin/bash -i},
@item if that fails, try @file{/bin/busybox sh -i}, and
@item if both fail, print a boot failure message and halt.
@end enumerate

This policy keeps early boot behavior small and explicit: either a userspace
shell starts, or the kernel stops instead of carrying a second interactive
environment.
