@node Building VibeOS
@chapter Building VibeOS

@cindex building VibeOS
@cindex image construction
@cindex documentation target
@findex check-toolchain
@vindex BUILD_DIR

@menu
* Build Prerequisites::
* Top-Level Targets::
* Kernel Build Rules::
* Userspace Build Policy::
* Runtime Image Layout::
* Running and Testing::
* Building the Manual::
@end menu

@node Build Prerequisites
@section Build Prerequisites

The top-level @code{check-toolchain} target checks the tools that are required
for a full OS build:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{gcc},
@item @code{ld},
@item @code{nasm},
@item @code{strip} or a compatible replacement when stripping is enabled,
@item @code{grub-mkrescue},
@item @code{grub-install},
@item @code{mkfs.ext2}, and
@item @code{qemu-system-x86_64}.
@end itemize

In practice, userspace builds also depend heavily on:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{zig},
@item typical Autoconf host tools,
@item @code{readelf} for validation, and
@item utilities used by GRUB and ext2 image generation.
@end itemize

The documentation target depends on the Texinfo tools:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{texi2any} or @code{makeinfo}, and
@item @code{texi2pdf}.
@end itemize

@node Top-Level Targets
@section Top-Level Targets

The main targets exposed by the root @file{Makefile} are:

@table @code
@item all
Alias for @code{disk}.

@item iso
Build the kernel, initramfs, and @file{/usr} ext2 image, then package them into
@file{build/vibeos.iso}.

@item disk
Build the same runtime artifacts and install them into a BIOS plus GPT raw disk
image at @file{build/vibeos-gpt.img}.

@item run
Build the disk image and run it under QEMU.

@item all-debug, iso-debug, disk-debug, run-debug
Repeat the normal target graph with binary stripping disabled.

@item docs
Build the Texinfo manual into Info, single-file HTML, split HTML, and PDF
under @file{docs/out/}.
@end table

The kernel and userspace build graph is still intentionally flat.  There is no
secondary build orchestrator under the top-level makefile.

@node Kernel Build Rules
@section Kernel Build Rules

The kernel build is conventional and freestanding:

@itemize @bullet
@item NASM assembles the boot files in @file{kernel/boot/}.
@item GCC compiles the C files in @file{kernel/src/}.
@item LD links everything with @file{kernel/linker.ld}.
@end itemize

The kernel compilation flags emphasize freestanding execution:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{-ffreestanding},
@item @code{-fno-stack-protector},
@item @code{-fno-pie},
@item @code{-fno-builtin},
@item @code{-mno-red-zone},
@item no MMX, SSE, or SSE2 use in kernel code generation, and
@item a fixed page size in the linker flags.
@end itemize

The kernel image is stripped by default after linking.

@node Userspace Build Policy
@section Userspace Build Policy

@cindex userspace build policy
@cindex static musl
@cindex non-PIE

The userspace build wrappers follow a consistent policy:

@enumerate
@item Prefer @code{zig cc} or @code{zig c++} targeting
@code{x86_64-linux-musl}.
@item Pass static-linking flags.
@item Disable PIE when the package would otherwise emit a PIE binary.
@item Validate that the result is amd64, @code{ET_EXEC}, and has no requested
interpreter.
@item Stage the validated output into a tree that the image builders can copy.
@end enumerate

This policy is repeated in script after script because the current loader and
runtime are optimized for static non-PIE executables.

The wrappers also maintain package-local or repository-wide Zig caches so that
subsequent builds are cheaper.

@node Runtime Image Layout
@section Runtime Image Layout

The build produces three core runtime artifacts before any boot medium is
generated:

@table @file
@item build/vibeos-kernel.bin
The linked kernel.

@item build/initramfs.cpio
The root filesystem image loaded as Multiboot module 0.

@item build/usr.ext2
The ext2 image loaded as Multiboot module 1 and mounted at @file{/usr}.
@end table

The split between root and @file{/usr} is deliberate.

The initramfs contains the minimum system needed to come up:

@itemize @bullet
@item @file{/init},
@item @file{/bin/busybox},
@item essential coreutils copied into @file{/bin},
@item device and directory scaffolding such as @file{/dev}, @file{/proc},
@file{/sys}, and @file{/tmp}, and
@item an empty @file{/usr} mount point.
@end itemize

The ext2 image contains the larger optional userspace:

@itemize @bullet
@item Bash,
@item the remaining coreutils,
@item @code{help}, @code{sl}, @code{file}, and @code{nano},
@item groff and man-db runtime files,
@item Linux man-pages, and
@item terminfo and other shared data.
@end itemize

@node Running and Testing
@section Running and Testing

The default run path is:

@example
make run
@end example

which expands to a QEMU invocation similar to:

@example
qemu-system-x86_64 \
  -machine q35,accel=kvm:tcg \
  -m 1G \
  -drive format=raw,file=build/vibeos-gpt.img \
  -serial stdio
@end example

The serial console is especially important because the kernel mirrors console
output to COM1.

@node Building the Manual
@section Building the Manual

The @code{docs} target does four separate conversions from
@file{docs/vibeos.texi}:

@enumerate
@item single-file Info output to @file{docs/out/vibeos.info},
@item single-file HTML output to @file{docs/out/vibeos.html},
@item split HTML output under @file{docs/out/html/}, and
@item PDF output to @file{docs/out/vibeos.pdf}.
@end enumerate

The PDF build uses a dedicated temporary build directory under
@file{docs/out/.texi2pdf} so the repository root is not polluted with TeX
auxiliary files.
