@node Console and Devices
@chapter Console, Serial, Input, and Power

@cindex console
@cindex framebuffer
@cindex serial console
@cindex input path
@cindex ACPI power control
@findex console_init
@findex serial_init
@findex power_shutdown
@vindex CONSOLE_FONT_MAX_WIDTH
@vindex CONSOLE_FONT_MAX_HEIGHT
@vindex CONSOLE_FONT_VARIANT_COUNT

@menu
* Console Model::
* ANSI and Terminal Features::
* Serial Port Backend::
* Keyboard and Input Multiplexing::
* TTY and Framebuffer Devices::
* Power Management and Reset::
@end menu

@node Console Model
@section Console Model

The console implementation in @file{kernel/src/console.c} uses an internal
text-cell model backed by VGA-style cells.  VGA text mode is fixed at 80x25.
Framebuffer consoles keep the height at 25 rows and derive the column count
from the display aspect ratio so the text cell width slaves to the fixed text
height.  Virtio GPU framebuffers also poll display configuration events so host
resolution changes can rebuild the scanout and redraw the console while the
system is running.

@itemize @bullet
@item VGA text memory at @code{0xB8000}, or
@item a Multiboot-provided RGB framebuffer.
@end itemize

The text-cell model stores:

@itemize @bullet
@item the character byte,
@item foreground and background attributes,
@item cursor position,
@item scroll-region state,
@item alternate-screen state, and
@item parser state for escape sequences.
@end itemize

When a framebuffer is present, the console renders characters by drawing the
best-fitting built-in bitmap font variant from @file{kernel/src/console_font.c}
and scaling that bitmap into the current framebuffer cell size.

@node ANSI and Terminal Features
@section ANSI and Terminal Features

The console parser supports the capabilities advertised by the shipped
@code{vibeos} terminfo entry:

@itemize @bullet
@item cursor movement,
@item screen, line, and character clearing,
@item scrolling regions,
@item indexed scrolling,
@item tab stops and forward/backward tab movement,
@item insertion, deletion, and repetition of lines and characters,
@item SGR color, bold, underline, blink, reverse-video, and invisible state,
@item save and restore of cursor position,
@item cursor-position and device-attribute reports,
@item cursor hide and show,
@item alternate-screen enter and leave through private mode 1049, and
@item DEC line-drawing graphics through shift-out/shift-in and ANSI SGR
charset switching.
@end itemize

This is the reason ncurses-style applications work at all in VibeOS.

@node Serial Port Backend
@section Serial Port Backend

@findex serial_putc
@findex serial_pollc

Serial support is implemented in @file{kernel/src/serial.c} using COM1 at
@code{0x3F8}.  The initialization sequence programs the UART directly through
I/O ports.

The console mirrors output to serial unconditionally.  This has two useful
effects:

@itemize @bullet
@item kernel diagnostics survive even when graphical output is unavailable, and
@item QEMU's stdio chardev becomes a reliable way to watch the system boot and
interact with it when host signal handling is disabled.
@end itemize

Serial input is also part of the generic input path.

@node Keyboard and Input Multiplexing
@section Keyboard and Input Multiplexing

@findex input_poll_char
@findex keyboard_poll_char

The generic input layer in @file{kernel/src/input.c} merges:

@itemize @bullet
@item serial input, and
@item polled PS/2 keyboard input from @file{kernel/src/keyboard.c}.
@end itemize

The keyboard path:

@itemize @bullet
@item tracks shift and control state,
@item handles the extended-scancode prefix,
@item translates scancodes through normal and shifted key maps, and
@item converts control combinations into ASCII control characters where that
makes sense.
@end itemize

The generic input layer then normalizes:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{\n} to @code{\r}, and
@item serial DEL to backspace.
@end itemize

Keyboard and serial-console control input can also be latched through signal
peek and poll hooks, allowing terminal job-control signals such as
@code{SIGINT} and @code{SIGTSTP} to reach the foreground process group even
when it is blocked outside the terminal read path.

@node TTY and Framebuffer Devices
@section TTY and Framebuffer Devices

The console is exposed to userland through two kinds of special files.

The TTY paths are:

@table @file
@item /dev/tty
Primary terminal device.

@item /dev/console
Alias of the same terminal behavior.
@end table

The framebuffer path is:

@table @file
@item /dev/fb0
Framebuffer device, only present when a valid Multiboot framebuffer was
discovered.
@end table

TTY ioctls support:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{TCGETS},
@item @code{TCSETS}, @code{TCSETSW}, and @code{TCSETSF},
@item @code{TIOCGPGRP} and @code{TIOCSPGRP},
@item @code{TIOCGWINSZ}, and
@item @code{FIONREAD}.
@end itemize

Framebuffer ioctls support:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{FBIOGET_FSCREENINFO},
@item @code{FBIOGET_VSCREENINFO},
@item @code{FBIOGETCMAP} and @code{FBIOPUTCMAP},
@item constrained @code{FBIOPUT_VSCREENINFO},
@item constrained @code{FBIOPAN_DISPLAY}, and
@item @code{FBIOBLANK}.
@end itemize

The framebuffer file also supports open, read, write, and seek operations by
directly accessing the mapped physical framebuffer range.

The XLibre framebuffer server takes ownership of the display with the Linux
@code{KDSETMODE} interface.  While graphics mode is active, kernel console
output continues over serial but does not draw into the framebuffer.  Returning
to text mode redraws the saved console contents.  The single-console VT
compatibility interface exposes @file{/dev/tty0} and @file{/dev/tty1} and the
subset of @code{VT_*}, @code{KD*}, and keyboard-mode operations used by
XLibre's KDrive Linux backend.

Raw input is exposed as @file{/dev/input/event0} for the PS/2 pointer and
@file{/dev/input/event1} for the PS/2 keyboard.  Both devices produce Linux
@code{input_event} records, support capability queries and exclusive grabs,
and participate in @code{poll}.  Character-mode terminal input remains
available whenever the keyboard event device is not grabbed.  An exclusive
grab is released when its last duplicated or inherited open-file reference is
closed, including when the owning process exits.

Xterm uses the Unix98 pseudoterminal interface exposed through
@file{/dev/ptmx} and dynamically allocated @file{/dev/pts/N} slave devices.
PTY master and slave descriptors provide bidirectional buffering, terminal
attributes and window sizing, foreground process-group operations, controlling
terminal setup, readiness polling, and hangup detection.

@node Power Management and Reset
@section Power Management and Reset

@findex power_init
@findex power_reboot

Power management is implemented in @file{kernel/src/power.c}.  The kernel:

@enumerate
@item locates RSDP information through Multiboot tags,
@item prefers the ACPI 2.0+ XSDT path when available,
@item falls back to the RSDT path when needed,
@item locates the FADT,
@item locates the DSDT, and
@item parses AML just far enough to recover the S5 sleep-type values.
@end enumerate

Shutdown first attempts ACPI S5 through the PM1 control registers.  If that
does not work, the kernel tries several emulator-friendly fallback ports and
then halts.

Reboot uses the keyboard controller reset command.  Halt simply disables
interrupts and loops on @code{hlt}.
