@node Filesystems and Namespace
@chapter Filesystems and Namespace

@cindex filesystem
@cindex initramfs
@cindex ext2
@cindex ext3
@cindex VFS
@cindex namespace
@findex fs_lookup
@findex ext2_mount_image
@findex initramfs_find
@vindex FS_MAX_PATH
@vindex FS_MAX_NAME

@menu
* Filesystem Design Summary::
* Initramfs Backend::
* ext2/ext3 Backend for /usr and /home::
* VFS Routing Rules::
* Synthetic Directories and Devices::
* Path Resolution and Symlink Semantics::
* Filesystem Mutability::
@end menu

@node Filesystem Design Summary
@section Filesystem Design Summary

VibeOS does not implement a general mount tree.  Instead, it exposes a small
set of fixed backends and a dispatcher:

@itemize @bullet
@item the initramfs backend for the root filesystem, and
@item the ext2/ext3 backend for @file{/usr} and @file{/home}.
@end itemize

The VFS layer in @file{kernel/src/fs.c} decides which backend owns a path and
then forwards lookup and read operations accordingly.

@node Initramfs Backend
@section Initramfs Backend

The initramfs parser consumes a @code{cpio newc} archive.  It stores a flat
table of entries in memory:

@itemize @bullet
@item normalized path,
@item data pointer,
@item file size, and
@item mode bits.
@end itemize

Important implementation details:

@itemize @bullet
@item Up to 1024 entries are remembered.
@item Archives up to 16 MiB may be copied to a fixed address at
@code{0x30000000}.
@item Paths are normalized to absolute names.
@item Lookups are linear scans over the indexed entry table.
@end itemize

This backend is intentionally simple because the root image is built by the
VibeOS scripts and loaded as an immutable module.

@node ext2/ext3 Backend for /usr and /home
@section ext2/ext3 Backend for /usr and /home

The ext2/ext3 implementation is the secondary filesystem backend used for
@file{/usr} and @file{/home}.  In the shipped boot configuration @file{/usr} is
mounted read-only, while @file{/home} is mounted read-write when a writable SCSI
disk image is attached.  If no writable home disk is available, the kernel falls
back to a volatile in-memory @file{/home} ramdisk.

The kernel backend itself supports both non-journaled ext2 and journaled ext3
filesystems.

It supports:

@itemize @bullet
@item superblock parsing,
@item group descriptor parsing,
@item inode lookup,
@item direct, single-indirect, double-indirect, and triple-indirect data block
resolution,
@item regular file reads,
@item symlink reads,
@item directory scans, and
@item directory child collection for user-visible directory enumeration.
@end itemize

The ext2/ext3 backend claims paths rooted at fixed mount points such as
@file{/usr} and @file{/home}.  Mounted images therefore augment the root
namespace without replacing it.

@node VFS Routing Rules
@section VFS Routing Rules

@findex fs_read
@findex fs_collect_children

The routing rule is intentionally small:

@itemize @bullet
@item If the path belongs to a mounted ext2/ext3 tree such as @file{/usr} or
@file{/home}, use that ext2/ext3 mount.
@item If @file{/home} is backed by the ramdisk fallback, use the ramdisk
backend for @file{/home} paths.
@item Otherwise use the initramfs backend.
@end itemize

This affects:

@itemize @bullet
@item path lookup,
@item file reads,
@item symlink reads, and
@item child enumeration.
@end itemize

The root directory behaves like a merged view.  It can expose initramfs entries
plus @file{/usr} when the ext2/ext3 backend is mounted.

@node Synthetic Directories and Devices
@section Synthetic Directories and Devices

The syscall layer synthesizes directory and device objects beyond what the
underlying backend filesystems contain.

Recognized synthetic directories include:

@example
/
/bin
/dev
/etc
/home
/proc
/sys
/tmp
/usr
/usr/bin
/var
@end example

Recognized synthetic non-directory paths include:

@example
/dev/tty
/dev/console
/dev/null
/dev/fb0
/proc/self/exe
@end example

These special paths are handled in the syscall layer, especially in the helper
functions around @code{path_mode_size}, @code{sys_openat}, @code{sys_ioctl}, and
@code{sys_readlinkat}.

@node Path Resolution and Symlink Semantics
@section Path Resolution and Symlink Semantics

Path resolution follows a predictable set of rules:

@itemize @bullet
@item relative paths are made absolute against either the current working
directory or a directory file descriptor,
@item repeated slashes are collapsed,
@item @samp{.} segments are ignored,
@item @samp{..} segments back up one component when possible, and
@item symlinks are resolved with a fixed maximum depth.
@end itemize

Final-component symlink following is selectable depending on the operation.  For
example, @code{readlinkat} does not follow the final link because it needs the
link object itself.

@node Filesystem Mutability
@section Filesystem Mutability

The shipped root initramfs and @file{/usr} mount are read-only in the current
boot configuration.  The default QEMU run path attaches @file{build/home.ext3}
as a writable SCSI disk and mounts it at @file{/home}.  When that disk is not
present, @file{/home} is still writable but volatile because it is backed by an
in-memory ramdisk.

You can:

@itemize @bullet
@item open files,
@item read files,
@item stat files,
@item traverse directories,
@item read symlinks,
@item access synthetic device-like paths, and
@item create, modify, rename, and remove files under writable @file{/home}.
@end itemize

The ext2/ext3 backend has read-write support for regular-file data, block and
inode allocation and freeing, truncate, file creation, special-file creation,
directories, symlinks, hard links, unlink, rmdir, rename, chmod, and chown.
Those paths are exposed through VFS helpers and Linux-compatible syscall entry
points, but the shipped @file{/usr} image is still mounted read-only, so
mutation attempts there fail with @code{EROFS}.
