@node Hacking on VibeOS
@chapter Hacking on VibeOS

@cindex hacking
@cindex extending VibeOS
@cindex adding programs
@cindex adding syscalls

@menu
* Working with the Existing Build Policy::
* Adding a New User Program::
* Extending the Kernel ABI::
* Changing the Filesystem Layout::
* Documentation Workflow::
@end menu

@node Working with the Existing Build Policy
@section Working with the Existing Build Policy

The existing build policy is part of the OS design, not just incidental makefile
machinery.

When changing or adding code, assume the following unless there is a clear
reason to do otherwise:

@itemize @bullet
@item static linking is preferred,
@item musl is preferred,
@item non-PIE amd64 executables are the safest runtime target,
@item the root filesystem and @file{/usr} remain read-only, and
@item scheduler behavior remains cooperative and syscall-driven.
@end itemize

If you violate one of these assumptions, document why and test the new path
explicitly.

@node Adding a New User Program
@section Adding a New User Program

The normal route for a new program is:

@enumerate
@item write or adapt a wrapper in @file{tools/},
@item target @code{x86_64-linux-musl},
@item enforce static, non-PIE output where possible,
@item validate the binary with @code{readelf},
@item decide whether it belongs in the initramfs or in @file{/usr}, and
@item add the staging path to either @file{tools/make_initramfs.sh} or
@file{tools/make_usr_ext2.sh}, or both.
@end enumerate

In-tree programs should live under @file{userspace/} and be built by a wrapper
that follows the same validation conventions as the existing scripts.

@node Extending the Kernel ABI
@section Extending the Kernel ABI

The kernel ABI is centered in @file{kernel/src/syscall.c}.

To add a new syscall, the normal steps are:

@enumerate
@item add any needed constants or structures in the relevant headers,
@item implement the helper logic in @file{kernel/src/syscall.c} or a supporting
subsystem,
@item add the syscall number dispatch case in @code{syscall_dispatch},
@item synchronize any process runtime state that must survive scheduling, and
@item document the new call in @ref{System Call Interface}.
@end enumerate

Because many waits and descriptor operations are scheduler-aware, new blocking
syscalls usually need extra thought about save and restore behavior.

@node Changing the Filesystem Layout
@section Changing the Filesystem Layout

The runtime namespace is jointly defined by:

@itemize @bullet
@item @file{tools/make_initramfs.sh},
@item @file{tools/make_usr_ext2.sh},
@item @file{kernel/src/fs.c},
@item @file{kernel/src/ext2.c}, and
@item the synthetic-path logic in @file{kernel/src/syscall.c}.
@end itemize

If you add a new synthetic directory or device path, remember that userland may
need changes in:

@itemize @bullet
@item stat helpers,
@item open logic,
@item read or write logic,
@item ioctl handling, and
@item directory enumeration.
@end itemize

@node Documentation Workflow
@section Documentation Workflow

The manual is now split across many Texinfo source files so it can evolve with
the system.

The normal workflow is:

@enumerate
@item edit the relevant chapter or appendix under @file{docs/},
@item run @code{make docs},
@item inspect at least one generated format under @file{docs/out/}, and
@item keep the source-file map and syscall chapter synchronized with code
changes that affect them.
@end enumerate

This manual is intended to be authoritative for the in-tree OS.  If the code
changes in a way that invalidates a chapter, the documentation should change in
the same patch series.
