@node Memory Management
@chapter Memory Management

@cindex memory management
@cindex kernel heap
@cindex virtual memory
@cindex user address space
@findex kmalloc_init
@findex vm_init
@findex vm_space_clone
@vindex HEAP_START
@vindex HEAP_SIZE
@vindex VM_USER_BASE
@vindex VM_USER_STACK_TOP
@vindex VM_USER_BRK_BASE
@vindex VM_USER_MMAP_BASE

@menu
* Kernel Heap Allocator::
* Kernel Paging Templates::
* User Address-Space Layout::
* VM Space Operations::
* brk and mmap Behavior::
@end menu

@node Kernel Heap Allocator
@section Kernel Heap Allocator

The kernel heap is a fixed virtual range managed by @file{kernel/src/kmalloc.c}.

Key constants are:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .20 .45
@headitem Constant @tab Value @tab Meaning
@item @code{HEAP_START} @tab @code{0x10000000} @tab Start of the kernel heap
@item @code{HEAP_SIZE} @tab @code{256 MiB} @tab Total heap span
@item @code{HEAP_END} @tab @code{0x20000000} @tab End of the heap
@end multitable

The allocator is a straightforward block allocator with:

@itemize @bullet
@item headers and footers,
@item best-fit selection,
@item block splitting,
@item adjacent-block coalescing, and
@item aligned allocation wrappers built on top of the main heap.
@end itemize

This is enough for page tables, copied images, process structures, and other
kernel allocations.  It is not intended to be a sophisticated slab allocator.

@node Kernel Paging Templates
@section Kernel Paging Templates

@findex vm_space_activate

The VM subsystem builds a kernel paging template that identity maps the low
4 GiB using 2 MiB pages.  Each process then receives:

@itemize @bullet
@item its own PML4,
@item its own PDPT,
@item its own page directory for the low part of the user space, and
@item lazily allocated page tables for user pages.
@end itemize

The low kernel identity map remains present while user mappings are overlaid in
the lower canonical address range.

@node User Address-Space Layout
@section User Address-Space Layout

The user layout constants from @file{kernel/include/vm.h} define the contract
used by the ELF loader, @code{brk}, @code{mmap}, and the initial stack builder.

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .20 .45
@headitem Constant @tab Value @tab Meaning
@item @code{VM_USER_BASE} @tab @code{0x00400000} @tab Lowest valid user mapping
@item @code{VM_USER_STACK_TOP} @tab @code{0x08000000} @tab Initial stack top
@item @code{VM_USER_STACK_SIZE} @tab @code{0x00200000} @tab Initial stack span
@item @code{VM_USER_BRK_BASE} @tab @code{0x09000000} @tab Initial program break
@item @code{VM_USER_MMAP_BASE} @tab @code{0x0c000000} @tab Initial @code{mmap} search base
@item @code{VM_USER_MMAP_LIMIT} @tab @code{0x0f000000} @tab @code{mmap} upper limit
@item @code{VM_USER_ELF_LIMIT} @tab @code{0x20000000} @tab ELF image upper limit
@item @code{VM_USER_LIMIT} @tab @code{0x40000000} @tab Highest accepted user address
@end multitable

The kernel therefore uses a deliberately compact 32-bit-like low-half address
layout even though the architecture is amd64.

@node VM Space Operations
@section VM Space Operations

@findex vm_space_map_zero
@findex vm_space_write
@findex vm_space_unmap

The main operations supported by the VM layer are:

@table @code
@item vm_space_init
Allocate and initialize a process VM space based on the kernel template.

@item vm_space_destroy
Free owned user pages and page-table state.

@item vm_space_activate
Install a VM space into @code{cr3}.

@item vm_space_reset_user
Discard all owned user mappings while keeping the VM structure itself alive.

@item vm_space_clone
Clone the currently mapped user pages into another VM space.

@item vm_space_map_zero
Map zero-filled user pages over a requested range.

@item vm_space_map_physical
Map a physical range into user space.

@item vm_space_write
Copy bytes from the kernel into user virtual memory.

@item vm_space_zero
Zero a user range.

@item vm_space_unmap
Remove user mappings and restore the identity-mapped placeholder entries.
@end table

The design is simple and explicit.  There is no paging daemon, copy-on-write,
protection-bit enforcement for user pages, or swap.

@node brk and mmap Behavior
@section brk and mmap Behavior

The syscall layer exposes @code{brk}, @code{mmap}, and @code{munmap}.

The current behavior is intentionally modest:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{brk} advances within the user @code{brk} region and allocates or
leaves mapped pages as needed.
@item @code{mmap} is geared toward anonymous mappings in the low user region.
@item @code{munmap} removes those mappings.
@item Protection bits are accepted but not used to enforce true page
permissions.
@end itemize

This is sufficient for the current statically linked userland but is not yet a
full Linux VM model.
