@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@cindex overview
@cindex design summary
@cindex static linking
@cindex musl

@menu
* Design Summary::
* Execution Model::
* Scope of the Manual::
* Reading Guide::
@end menu

@node Design Summary
@section Design Summary

VibeOS is a small operating-system prototype whose code is concentrated in one
top-level @file{Makefile}, one kernel tree, one small in-tree userspace tree,
and a set of build wrappers for third-party packages.

The implemented design is intentionally conservative:

@itemize @bullet
@item One freestanding monolithic kernel.
@item One architecture: amd64.
@item One boot protocol: Multiboot2.
@item One read-only root filesystem format: @code{cpio newc}.
@item One ext2/ext3 secondary filesystem backend, mounted read-only for
@file{/usr} and read-write for @file{/home} when a writable home image is
available.
@item One primary userspace ABI target: Linux-compatible amd64 syscalls.
@item One preferred binary model: static, non-PIE, musl-linked executables.
@end itemize

The system is therefore easier to understand than a production Unix kernel, but
the current tree already includes enough subsystems to behave like a small
bootable Unix-like environment:

@itemize @bullet
@item long-mode bootstrap code,
@item a VGA and framebuffer text console,
@item serial I/O,
@item a kernel heap,
@item per-process virtual-memory spaces,
@item a process table and blocking scheduler,
@item signals, process groups, and sessions,
@item TTY and pipe file descriptors,
@item virtio-net networking with a small IPv4 stack,
@item a filesystem namespace with read-only root and @file{/usr} images plus a
writable @file{/home} mount or ramdisk fallback,
@item an ELF loader with shebang support, and
@item enough Linux syscalls to run static BusyBox, Bash, coreutils, man-db,
less, wget, and related utilities.
@end itemize

@node Execution Model
@section Execution Model

@cindex execution model
@cindex dynamic loader
@vindex VM_USER_LIMIT

The execution model is one of the most important things to understand before
reading the rest of the source.

VibeOS uses the shared ELF mapper in @file{kernel/src/elf_loader.c} for both the
early bootstrap path and @code{execve}.  It loads @code{PT_INTERP} images,
constructs Linux-compatible auxiliary vectors and aligned entry stacks, and
supports glibc's runtime mapping requirements.

The repository has two supported build profiles:

@itemize @bullet
@item static, non-PIE @code{x86_64-linux-musl} executables, and
@item PIE or @code{ET_EXEC} glibc executables using
@file{/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2} and the DSOs under @file{/usr/lib64}.
@end itemize

Both profiles are first-class.  Use musl when producing a static artifact and
glibc when producing a dynamically linked artifact; validate the resulting ELF
form and interpreter with @code{readelf} before staging it.

@node Scope of the Manual
@section Scope of the Manual

@cindex manual scope
@cindex upstream packages

This manual aims to answer every practical question a developer is likely to
have about the in-tree OS:

@itemize @bullet
@item how the kernel boots,
@item how memory and process state are represented,
@item how filesystems are mounted and routed,
@item which syscalls exist and what they actually do,
@item what is staged into the system image,
@item how third-party packages are built for VibeOS, and
@item where each in-tree file fits into the whole.
@end itemize

The manual does not try to re-document the internals of upstream projects under
@file{external/}.  For example, it documents how VibeOS builds Bash and where
the resulting binary is staged, but it does not try to rewrite the Bash
Reference Manual.

@node Reading Guide
@section Reading Guide

If you want the shortest route to the source:

@enumerate
@item Read @ref{Building VibeOS} for the artifact graph.
@item Read @ref{Boot and Initialization} for the machine startup path.
@item Read @ref{System Call Interface} for the kernel ABI that userland sees.
@item Use @ref{Source File Map} as a file-by-file index into the tree.
@end enumerate

If you want to change behavior rather than just understand it:

@enumerate
@item For kernel runtime behavior, focus on @file{kernel/src/syscall.c},
@file{kernel/src/userland.c}, @file{kernel/src/vm.c}, and
@file{kernel/src/fs.c}.
@item For boot issues, focus on @file{kernel/boot/boot.asm},
@file{kernel/boot/interrupts.asm}, and @file{kernel/src/main.c}.
@item For image construction and userspace integration, focus on the scripts in
@file{tools/}.
@end enumerate
