@node Processes and Signals
@chapter Processes, Scheduling, and Signals

@cindex process table
@cindex scheduler
@cindex signals
@cindex process groups
@cindex sessions
@findex process_init
@findex process_alloc
@findex process_send_signal
@vindex MAX_PROCESSES
@vindex PROCESS_MAX_FDS
@vindex MAX_PENDING_SIGNALS

@menu
* Process Representation::
* The First Process::
* File Descriptor State::
* Scheduling Model::
* Blocking Operations::
* Pipe Implementation::
* Signal Delivery and Job Control::
* Sessions and PID 1::
@end menu

@node Process Representation
@section Process Representation

The process table is a fixed-size array of @code{struct process} instances.

Each process records:

@itemize @bullet
@item identity fields such as PID, PPID, PGID, and SID,
@item state such as runnable, running, blocked, stopped, or zombie,
@item exit status bookkeeping,
@item the VM space,
@item the open file descriptor table,
@item current working directory,
@item @code{brk}, next @code{mmap} base, and umask,
@item signal handlers and blocked-signal mask,
@item pending signals,
@item saved register state for resumed execution, and
@item blocking-wait metadata for syscalls that may yield the CPU.
@end itemize

This is enough state to let the syscall layer save one process, schedule
another, and later restore the original process into user mode.

@node The First Process
@section The First Process

@findex process_current

The first process is created by @code{process_init}.  It always starts as:

@itemize @bullet
@item PID 1,
@item PPID 0,
@item PGID 1,
@item SID 1,
@item current working directory @file{/}, and
@item the owner of the initial VM space.
@end itemize

The syscall subsystem later synchronizes the global runtime variables with this
process structure and marks file descriptors 0, 1, and 2 as TTY handles.

@node File Descriptor State
@section File Descriptor State

VibeOS uses a fixed-size file descriptor table with 64 descriptors per process.

Supported descriptor kinds include:

@itemize @bullet
@item TTY,
@item null device,
@item framebuffer,
@item regular file,
@item directory,
@item pipe read end, and
@item pipe write end.
@end itemize

The descriptor table tracks:

@itemize @bullet
@item descriptor kind,
@item open flags,
@item descriptor flags such as @code{FD_CLOEXEC},
@item current offset,
@item an attached filesystem entry where relevant, and
@item a pipe identifier when the descriptor refers to a pipe endpoint.
@end itemize

@node Scheduling Model
@section Scheduling Model

@findex schedule_away

VibeOS scheduling is not timer-driven.  The scheduler runs when the current task
blocks in the syscall layer or exits.

This makes the system cooperative in practice:

@itemize @bullet
@item a process runs until it traps into the kernel and performs a syscall,
@item if that syscall can complete immediately, the process often continues,
@item if it must wait and another process has saved runnable context, the kernel
saves the current process and resumes another one.
@end itemize

There is no periodic preemption and no interrupt-driven timeslice accounting.

@node Blocking Operations
@section Blocking Operations

The scheduler understands several wait reasons:

@itemize @bullet
@item TTY reads,
@item pipe reads,
@item pipe writes,
@item @code{wait4},
@item @code{select} and @code{pselect6}, and
@item @code{nanosleep}.
@end itemize

For each blocked process, the kernel stores enough metadata to later ask
whether the wait condition has become ready.  The completion helpers then
populate the saved return value and mark the process runnable again.

@node Pipe Implementation
@section Pipe Implementation

@findex sys_pipe2

Pipes are implemented as fixed-size in-kernel ring buffers.

Important facts:

@itemize @bullet
@item The maximum number of pipes is fixed.
@item Each pipe has a 64 KiB capacity.
@item Readers block when the buffer is empty unless the descriptor is
nonblocking.
@item Writers block when the buffer is full unless the descriptor is
nonblocking.
@item The kernel tracks whether a pipe still has readers or writers by scanning
all live descriptor tables.
@end itemize

This is a real inter-process communication mechanism, not just a stub.

@node Signal Delivery and Job Control
@section Signal Delivery and Job Control

@findex sys_kill
@findex sys_rt_sigaction
@findex sys_rt_sigprocmask

The signal implementation supports a practical subset of Linux behavior.

Implemented pieces include:

@itemize @bullet
@item installing and querying handlers with @code{rt_sigaction},
@item modifying the blocked-signal mask with @code{rt_sigprocmask},
@item process-directed and process-group-directed @code{kill},
@item default stop, continue, terminate, and kill actions,
@item parent notification through @code{SIGCHLD}, and
@item stop and continue reporting through @code{wait4}.
@end itemize

TTY-generated job-control behavior is also present.  The terminal layer tracks a
foreground process group, and control characters can be translated into
@code{SIGINT} or @code{SIGTSTP} delivery to that foreground group.

@node Sessions and PID 1
@section Sessions, Process Groups, and PID 1 Special Cases

The kernel supports:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{setpgid},
@item @code{getpgrp},
@item @code{setsid}, and
@item @code{getpgid}.
@end itemize

The TTY layer uses the foreground process group for signal routing.

PID 1 has one VibeOS-specific behavior that is worth calling out explicitly:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{SIGUSR1} halts the machine,
@item @code{SIGUSR2} powers the machine off, and
@item @code{SIGTERM} reboots the machine.
@end itemize

This makes the usual small-system userspace shutdown flows work even though PID
1 in VibeOS is a normal bootstrap shell process rather than a dedicated init
system with a richer service manager around it.
