@node Program Loading and Userspace
@chapter Program Loading and Userspace

@cindex ELF loader
@cindex shebang
@cindex auxiliary vector
@cindex userspace layout
@findex userland_run_default_shell
@findex sys_execve
@vindex USER_ET_DYN_BASE
@vindex USER_INTERP_BASE

@menu
* Bootstrap Loader and execve::
* ELF Image Mapping Rules::
* Interpreter-Backed Executables::
* Shebang Processing::
* Initial Stack and Environment::
* Userspace Layout and Startup::
* In-Tree Userspace Helper::
@end menu

@node Bootstrap Loader and execve
@section Bootstrap Loader and execve

There are two code paths that can start a user program:

@itemize @bullet
@item the early bootstrap loader in @file{kernel/src/userland.c}, used before
the normal syscall path is active for user programs, and
@item the general @code{execve} implementation in @file{kernel/src/syscall.c}.
@end itemize

The early loader is only responsible for launching the first interactive shell.
The syscall path is what later user programs use.

@node ELF Image Mapping Rules
@section ELF Image Mapping Rules

Both loaders understand ELF64 headers and a small set of program headers.

Accepted executable forms are:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{ET_EXEC}, and
@item @code{ET_DYN}.
@end itemize

Recognized program-header types are:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{PT_LOAD}, and
@item @code{PT_INTERP}.
@end itemize

The loader maps each loadable segment as zero-filled memory and then copies the
file-backed bytes into place.  The loader also calculates:

@itemize @bullet
@item entry point,
@item program-header table location,
@item load bias for @code{ET_DYN}, and
@item overall mapped image span.
@end itemize

These values are later exposed to the process through the auxiliary vector.

@node Interpreter-Backed Executables
@section Interpreter-Backed Executables

When a program contains @code{PT_INTERP}, VibeOS attempts to:

@enumerate
@item load the main program,
@item resolve and load the interpreter,
@item place the interpreter at a fixed higher base, and
@item enter user mode at the interpreter entry point while exposing the main
program's program-header information.
@end enumerate

This is good enough for experimentation, but it is still not the preferred
deployment model.  The repository-wide packaging scripts continue to target
static @code{ET_EXEC} binaries because that is the path expected to work.

@node Shebang Processing
@section Shebang Processing

The @code{execve} path also handles script files beginning with @samp{#!}.

The parser:

@itemize @bullet
@item detects the interpreter path,
@item captures one optional argument after the interpreter,
@item rewrites @code{argv} so the interpreter becomes @code{argv[0]},
@item inserts the optional argument when present, and
@item inserts the script path before the script's remaining arguments.
@end itemize

Nested interpreter resolution is bounded to prevent unending recursion.

@node Initial Stack and Environment
@section Initial Stack and Environment

@findex build_exec_stack

When a program is launched, the kernel constructs a Linux-like initial user
stack containing:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{argc},
@item the @code{argv} pointer vector,
@item the @code{envp} pointer vector, and
@item an auxiliary vector with entries such as @code{AT_PHDR}, @code{AT_PHENT},
@code{AT_PHNUM}, @code{AT_ENTRY}, @code{AT_BASE}, @code{AT_RANDOM},
@code{AT_PLATFORM}, and @code{AT_EXECFN}.
@end itemize

Default environment strings include:

@example
TERM=ansi
HOME=/
PATH=/bin:/sbin:/usr/bin
SH_STANDALONE=1
GLIBC_TUNABLES=glibc.pthread.rseq=0
@end example

This is one of the reasons statically built GNU userland programs work at all
inside VibeOS.

@node Userspace Layout and Startup
@section Userspace Layout and Startup

Userland is split between the root filesystem and @file{/usr}.

Root contains the essential boot path:

@itemize @bullet
@item @file{/init},
@item @file{/bin/busybox},
@item essential coreutils commands,
@item shell startup files such as @file{/.bashrc}, and
@item the message of the day.
@end itemize

@file{/usr} contains the larger optional environment:

@itemize @bullet
@item Bash,
@item non-essential coreutils commands,
@item groff and man-db frontends,
@item Linux man-pages,
@item @code{file},
@item @code{nano},
@item @code{sl}, and
@item the in-tree @code{help} helper.
@end itemize

The generated @file{/init} script is intentionally simple:

@example
if [ -x /usr/bin/bash ]; then
  exec /usr/bin/bash -i
fi
exec /bin/busybox sh -i
@end example

@node In-Tree Userspace Helper
@section In-Tree Userspace Helper

The in-tree userspace helper is @file{userspace/help.c}.  It is compiled by
@file{tools/build_help.sh} into a static musl binary and staged into
@file{/usr/bin/help}.

Its purpose is not to dump every command on the system.  Instead it gives a
curated quick start that points users toward:

@itemize @bullet
@item basic inspection commands,
@item shell choices,
@item BusyBox applet discovery,
@item manual-page browsing, and
@item file identification through @code{file(1)}.
@end itemize
