@node Source Layout
@chapter Source Layout

@cindex source layout
@cindex repository layout

@menu
* Top-Level Tree::
* Kernel Tree::
* Userspace Tree::
* Tools Tree::
* Third-Party Source Trees::
@end menu

@node Top-Level Tree
@section Top-Level Tree

The repository root is intentionally shallow:

@table @file
@item Makefile
The single top-level build entry point.  It drives kernel compilation,
userspace package building, image construction, QEMU launch, and documentation.

@item README.md
Short project overview and quick start.

@item docs/
Texinfo manual sources and generated outputs.

@item kernel/
Architecture-specific and machine-independent kernel code.

@item userspace/
In-tree userspace code owned by this repository.

@item tools/
Build wrappers, staging helpers, and image-generation scripts.

@item external/
Upstream source trees used to populate the userspace environment.

@item build/
Generated build artifacts.  This directory is disposable.
@end table

@node Kernel Tree
@section Kernel Tree

The kernel tree is split by purpose rather than by subsystem abstraction level:

@table @file
@item kernel/boot/
Assembly files for the bootstrap path, interrupt and syscall entry, GDT and
IDT loading, and transition to user mode.

@item kernel/include/
Kernel headers.  These define public interfaces between subsystems and expose
the constants that shape address-space layout, process limits, filesystem
semantics, and syscall frame layout.

@item kernel/src/
The main implementation of the kernel.

@item kernel/linker.ld
The linker script that fixes the kernel image at 1 MiB and defines the section
layout consumed by the bootstrap code and the heap initializer.
@end table

@node Userspace Tree
@section Userspace Tree

The in-tree userspace tree is deliberately small.

At the time of writing, it contains one program:

@table @file
@item userspace/help.c
A static musl helper that prints a curated introduction to the VibeOS
environment.  This is not upstream software; it is part of the OS tree.
@end table

The fact that the in-tree userspace tree is small does not mean the runtime is
small.  Most user-visible commands are built from upstream sources through the
integration scripts documented later in this manual.

@node Tools Tree
@section Tools Tree

The @file{tools/} directory is where the repository turns policy into repeatable
build behavior.

Broadly speaking, the scripts fall into four classes:

@itemize @bullet
@item package build wrappers, such as @file{build_bash.sh} or
@file{build_coreutils.sh};
@item staging helpers, such as @file{make_initramfs.sh} and
@file{make_usr_ext2.sh};
@item boot media generators, such as @file{make_iso.sh} and
@file{make_gpt_disk.sh}; and
@item shared helpers such as @file{strip_helpers.sh}.
@end itemize

Each script is covered in more detail in @ref{Build Script Reference}.

@node Third-Party Source Trees
@section Third-Party Source Trees

The @file{external/} directory contains upstream source trees for packages that
VibeOS builds into its userspace images.

Important examples include:

@itemize @bullet
@item BusyBox,
@item Bash,
@item GNU coreutils,
@item ncurses,
@item groff,
@item man-db,
@item Linux man-pages,
@item nano, and
@item file(1).
@end itemize

These trees are inputs to VibeOS, not part of the core kernel.  The OS-specific
behavior lives in the wrapper scripts that configure and stage them.
