@node System Call Interface
@chapter System Call Interface

@cindex system calls
@cindex Linux ABI
@cindex syscall dispatcher
@findex syscall_init
@findex syscall_dispatch
@vindex IA32_LSTAR
@vindex IA32_STAR
@vindex IA32_FMASK

@menu
* Entry Paths and Calling Convention::
* Files and Paths::
* Descriptors and Devices::
* Process and Signal Calls::
* Memory and Thread-Local Calls::
* Identity and Miscellaneous Calls::
* Compatibility Stubs and No-Op Calls::
* Error Model and Semantic Caveats::
@end menu

@node Entry Paths and Calling Convention
@section Entry Paths and Calling Convention

VibeOS provides two ways for user mode to enter the kernel:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{int $0x80} through IDT vector 128, and
@item amd64 @code{syscall} through the MSR-programmed fast path.
@end itemize

The main calling convention follows the Linux amd64 syscall ABI:

@itemize @bullet
@item syscall number in @code{rax},
@item arguments in @code{rdi}, @code{rsi}, @code{rdx}, @code{r10},
@code{r8}, and @code{r9}, and
@item return value in @code{rax}.
@end itemize

The dispatcher itself is a large switch over syscall numbers in
@file{kernel/src/syscall.c}.

@node Files and Paths
@section Files, Paths, and Directories

The following file and path calls are recognized:

@multitable @columnfractions .10 .20 .70
@headitem Nr @tab Name @tab Notes
@item 2 @tab @code{open} @tab Implemented as an @code{openat} wrapper using
@code{AT_FDCWD}.
@item 3 @tab @code{close} @tab Closes regular descriptors, pipe endpoints, and
Unix-domain sockets.
@item 4 @tab @code{stat} @tab Linux-compat stat on a followed path.
@item 5 @tab @code{fstat} @tab Stat by descriptor.
@item 6 @tab @code{lstat} @tab Linux-compat stat without following the final
symlink.
@item 8 @tab @code{lseek} @tab Supported for files, directories, and
framebuffers where meaningful.
@item 17 @tab @code{pread64} @tab Position-based reads without updating the
normal file offset.
@item 18 @tab @code{pwrite64} @tab Position-based writes for writable regular
files and framebuffers.
@item 21 @tab @code{access} @tab Existence-style check built on path lookup.
@item 76 @tab @code{truncate} @tab VFS truncate for writable regular files.
@item 77 @tab @code{ftruncate} @tab Descriptor-based regular-file truncate.
@item 79 @tab @code{getcwd} @tab Returns the kernel-tracked current directory.
@item 80 @tab @code{chdir} @tab Changes the kernel-tracked current directory.
@item 82 @tab @code{rename} @tab Implemented through @code{renameat}.
@item 83 @tab @code{mkdir} @tab Implemented through @code{mkdirat}.
@item 84 @tab @code{rmdir} @tab Implemented through @code{unlinkat} with
@code{AT_REMOVEDIR}.
@item 85 @tab @code{creat} @tab Implemented through @code{openat}.
@item 86 @tab @code{link} @tab Implemented through @code{linkat}.
@item 87 @tab @code{unlink} @tab Implemented through @code{unlinkat}.
@item 88 @tab @code{symlink} @tab Implemented through @code{symlinkat}.
@item 89 @tab @code{readlink} @tab Implemented through @code{readlinkat}.
@item 90 @tab @code{chmod} @tab Implemented through the VFS chmod helper.
@item 91 @tab @code{fchmod} @tab Descriptor-based chmod.
@item 92 @tab @code{chown} @tab Implemented through the VFS chown helper.
@item 93 @tab @code{fchown} @tab Descriptor-based chown.
@item 94 @tab @code{lchown} @tab Non-following final-symlink chown.
@item 217 @tab @code{getdents64} @tab Directory enumeration over the merged
namespace.
@item 257 @tab @code{openat} @tab Main path-open primitive.
@item 258 @tab @code{mkdirat} @tab VFS directory creation.
@item 259 @tab @code{mknodat} @tab VFS regular and special-file creation.
@item 260 @tab @code{fchownat} @tab Path chown relative to a directory fd.
@item 262 @tab @code{newfstatat} @tab Followed-path stat.
@item 263 @tab @code{unlinkat} @tab VFS unlink/rmdir.
@item 264 @tab @code{renameat} @tab VFS rename.
@item 265 @tab @code{linkat} @tab VFS hard-link creation.
@item 266 @tab @code{symlinkat} @tab VFS symlink creation.
@item 267 @tab @code{readlinkat} @tab Non-following symlink read.
@item 268 @tab @code{fchmodat} @tab Path chmod relative to a directory fd.
@item 269 @tab @code{faccessat} @tab Same general existence semantics as
@code{access}.
@item 316 @tab @code{renameat2} @tab Supported with zero flags.
@item 332 @tab @code{statx} @tab Partial compatibility implementation.
@item 439 @tab @code{faccessat2} @tab Same path existence behavior as the
simpler access helpers.
@end multitable

The shipped @file{/usr} mount is read-only, so mutating filesystem calls
currently fail there with @code{EROFS}; the ext2/ext3 backend and VFS paths are
implemented for read-write ext2 or ext3 mounts.

@node Descriptors and Devices
@section Descriptors, Polling, and Devices

Descriptor and multiplexing calls include:

@multitable @columnfractions .10 .20 .70
@headitem Nr @tab Name @tab Notes
@item 0 @tab @code{read} @tab Supports TTY, framebuffer, pipe, Unix-domain
socket, regular-file, and null descriptors.
@item 1 @tab @code{write} @tab Supports TTY, framebuffer, pipe, Unix-domain
socket, and null descriptors.
@item 7 @tab @code{poll} @tab Busy-wait implementation without a timer source.
@item 16 @tab @code{ioctl} @tab TTY and framebuffer-specific commands.
@item 19 @tab @code{readv} @tab Built on repeated @code{read}.
@item 20 @tab @code{writev} @tab Built on repeated @code{write}.
@item 22 @tab @code{pipe} @tab Equivalent to @code{pipe2} with zero flags.
@item 23 @tab @code{select} @tab Blocking scheduler-aware descriptor
multiplexing.
@item 32 @tab @code{dup} @tab Duplicate descriptor.
@item 33 @tab @code{dup2} @tab Duplicate to an exact descriptor.
@item 40 @tab @code{sendfile} @tab File-to-descriptor copy helper.
@item 41 @tab @code{socket} @tab Supports pathname @code{AF_UNIX}
@code{SOCK_STREAM} sockets plus limited @code{AF_INET} stream, datagram, and
raw ICMP sockets.
@item 42 @tab @code{connect} @tab Connects a Unix-domain stream socket to a
listening pathname endpoint, or records/connects an IPv4 remote endpoint for
@code{AF_INET} sockets.
@item 43 @tab @code{accept} @tab Accepts pending Unix-domain stream
connections.
@item 44 @tab @code{sendto} @tab Send path for Unix-domain stream sockets and
limited IPv4 TCP, UDP, and raw ICMP sockets.
@item 45 @tab @code{recvfrom} @tab Receive path for Unix-domain stream sockets
and limited IPv4 TCP, UDP, and raw ICMP sockets.
@item 46 @tab @code{sendmsg} @tab Vector send helper layered over
@code{sendto}; @code{AF_INET} data is flattened into one bounded packet buffer.
@item 47 @tab @code{recvmsg} @tab Vector receive helper layered over
@code{recvfrom}; control-message handling is not implemented.
@item 48 @tab @code{shutdown} @tab Read-side and write-side shutdown for
connected Unix-domain stream sockets, and write-side close for connected IPv4
TCP sockets.
@item 49 @tab @code{bind} @tab Binds a Unix-domain stream socket to a pathname
in the synthetic namespace, or binds an IPv4 socket to a local port/address.
@item 50 @tab @code{listen} @tab Marks a bound Unix-domain stream socket as a
listener with a bounded pending queue.
@item 51 @tab @code{getsockname} @tab Reports the bound or connected local
Unix-domain pathname, or the IPv4 local address and port.
@item 52 @tab @code{getpeername} @tab Reports the connected peer pathname or
IPv4 address and port where available.
@item 53 @tab @code{socketpair} @tab Builds a connected Unix-domain stream
pair.
@item 54 @tab @code{setsockopt} @tab Accepts options as compatibility no-ops on
socket descriptors.
@item 55 @tab @code{getsockopt} @tab Returns a zero integer value for
recognized socket descriptors when the caller supplies enough space.
@item 72 @tab @code{fcntl} @tab Limited support for duplication and flag
queries or updates.
@item 270 @tab @code{pselect6} @tab Same scan model as @code{select}.
@item 288 @tab @code{accept4} @tab Accept path with nonblocking and
close-on-exec flags.
@item 292 @tab @code{dup3} @tab Implemented like exact descriptor duplication.
@item 293 @tab @code{pipe2} @tab Main pipe constructor; flags are currently
restricted.
@end multitable

The kernel understands TTY descriptors, @file{/dev/null}, a framebuffer
descriptor, directories, regular files, pipes, pathname
@code{AF_UNIX}/@code{SOCK_STREAM} sockets, and limited IPv4 sockets over the
in-tree network stack.  The IPv4 path currently covers ARP, DHCP configuration,
ICMP echo traffic, UDP datagrams, and client-side TCP streams; it is sufficient
for basic tools such as statically linked @code{wget}, but it is not a complete
Linux network stack.

@node Process and Signal Calls
@section Process and Signal Calls

Process-management and signal-related calls include:

@multitable @columnfractions .10 .20 .70
@headitem Nr @tab Name @tab Notes
@item 13 @tab @code{rt_sigaction} @tab Install or query handlers.
@item 14 @tab @code{rt_sigprocmask} @tab Modify blocked-signal mask.
@item 15 @tab @code{rt_sigreturn} @tab Restore user context after signal
delivery.
@item 35 @tab @code{nanosleep} @tab Busy-wait or scheduler-assisted sleep using
a synthetic time base.
@item 36 @tab @code{getitimer} @tab Reports the synthetic real interval timer.
@item 37 @tab @code{alarm} @tab Sets the synthetic real interval timer in
seconds.
@item 38 @tab @code{setitimer} @tab Configures the synthetic real interval
timer.
@item 39 @tab @code{getpid} @tab Returns the current PID.
@item 56 @tab @code{clone} @tab Restricted clone implementation.
@item 57 @tab @code{fork} @tab Fork-like VM clone.
@item 58 @tab @code{vfork} @tab Currently behaves through the same fork-like
path.
@item 59 @tab @code{execve} @tab Main image-replacement path.
@item 60 @tab @code{exit} @tab Process exit.
@item 61 @tab @code{wait4} @tab Parent wait and reaping path.
@item 62 @tab @code{kill} @tab Signal delivery to processes and process groups.
@item 95 @tab @code{umask} @tab Update process umask.
@item 109 @tab @code{setpgid} @tab Process-group assignment.
@item 110 @tab @code{getppid} @tab Returns current PPID.
@item 111 @tab @code{getpgrp} @tab Returns current PGID.
@item 112 @tab @code{setsid} @tab Create a new session.
@item 121 @tab @code{getpgid} @tab Query process-group identity.
@item 169 @tab @code{reboot} @tab Halt, power off, or reboot through kernel
helpers.
@item 218 @tab @code{set_tid_address} @tab Track a clear-TID address.
@item 231 @tab @code{exit_group} @tab Mapped to the same exit logic as
@code{exit}.
@end multitable

@node Memory and Thread-Local Calls
@section Memory and Thread-Local Calls

Memory and thread-local-state calls include:

@multitable @columnfractions .10 .20 .70
@headitem Nr @tab Name @tab Notes
@item 9 @tab @code{mmap} @tab Anonymous and low-region mapping helper.
@item 11 @tab @code{munmap} @tab Unmap helper.
@item 12 @tab @code{brk} @tab Program-break management.
@item 158 @tab @code{arch_prctl} @tab Supports @code{ARCH_SET_FS} and
@code{ARCH_GET_FS}.
@end multitable

@node Identity and Miscellaneous Calls
@section Identity, Limits, and Miscellaneous Calls

Miscellaneous calls include:

@multitable @columnfractions .10 .20 .70
@headitem Nr @tab Name @tab Notes
@item 63 @tab @code{uname} @tab Returns VibeOS identity strings.
@item 97 @tab @code{getrlimit} @tab Limited resource-limit reporting.
@item 102 @tab @code{getuid} @tab Returns the process real user ID.
@item 104 @tab @code{getgid} @tab Returns the process real group ID.
@item 105 @tab @code{setuid} @tab Updates process user credentials with
root and saved-ID checks.
@item 106 @tab @code{setgid} @tab Updates process group credentials with
root and saved-ID checks.
@item 107 @tab @code{geteuid} @tab Returns the process effective user ID.
@item 108 @tab @code{getegid} @tab Returns the process effective group ID.
@item 113 @tab @code{setreuid} @tab Updates real/effective user IDs.
@item 114 @tab @code{setregid} @tab Updates real/effective group IDs.
@item 115 @tab @code{getgroups} @tab Reports no supplementary groups.
@item 116 @tab @code{setgroups} @tab Root-only compatibility no-op.
@item 117 @tab @code{setresuid} @tab Updates real/effective/saved user IDs.
@item 118 @tab @code{getresuid} @tab Reports real/effective/saved user IDs.
@item 119 @tab @code{setresgid} @tab Updates real/effective/saved group IDs.
@item 120 @tab @code{getresgid} @tab Reports real/effective/saved group IDs.
@item 122 @tab @code{setfsuid} @tab Updates the filesystem user ID when
permitted and returns the old value.
@item 123 @tab @code{setfsgid} @tab Updates the filesystem group ID when
permitted and returns the old value.
@item 132 @tab @code{utime} @tab Updates path timestamps through the VFS.
@item 162 @tab @code{sync} @tab Flushes writable ext2/ext3 mounts.
@item 186 @tab @code{gettid} @tab Returns the current PID; VibeOS does not have
separate thread IDs.
@item 228 @tab @code{clock_gettime} @tab Synthetic time source.
@item 229 @tab @code{clock_getres} @tab Reports a fixed synthetic clock
resolution.
@item 235 @tab @code{utimes} @tab Updates path timestamps through the VFS.
@item 261 @tab @code{futimesat} @tab Updates path timestamps relative to a
directory fd.
@item 280 @tab @code{utimensat} @tab Updates path timestamps with
@code{UTIME_NOW}, @code{UTIME_OMIT}, and selected @code{AT_*} flags.
@item 302 @tab @code{prlimit64} @tab Limited resource-limit interface.
@item 318 @tab @code{getrandom} @tab Pseudorandom bytes from a simple internal
generator.
@end multitable

@node Compatibility Stubs and No-Op Calls
@section Compatibility Stubs and No-Op Calls

Several syscall numbers are accepted mainly to keep userland startup paths
happy.

@multitable @columnfractions .10 .20 .70
@headitem Nr @tab Name @tab Behavior
@item 10 @tab @code{mprotect} @tab Updates user-page presence and write
permissions for existing mappings.
@item 28 @tab @code{madvise} @tab Returns success.
@item 131 @tab @code{sigaltstack} @tab Stores and reports alternate-signal-stack
state, but signal delivery does not yet switch to it.
@item 157 @tab @code{prctl} @tab Supports task name, dumpable,
no-new-privs, and parent-death-signal state; a few Linux compatibility
subcommands are accepted as no-ops.
@item 202 @tab @code{futex} @tab Supports basic wait/wake operations with
timeouts and signal interruption.
@item 273 @tab @code{set_robust_list} @tab Stores robust-list metadata for the
current task.
@item 334 @tab @code{rseq} @tab Returns @code{ENOSYS}.
@end multitable

These calls are best understood as compatibility shims, not complete
subsystems.

@node Error Model and Semantic Caveats
@section Error Model and Semantic Caveats

The syscall layer returns Linux-style negative error numbers from the kernel
implementation.  Common values include @code{EINVAL}, @code{ENOENT},
@code{EBADF}, @code{EAGAIN}, @code{ENOSYS}, @code{EPIPE}, @code{ESRCH}, and
@code{ENOMEM}.

Important semantic caveats to remember:

@itemize @bullet
@item Filesystem mutation is limited to writable ext2/ext3 mounts, the
@file{/home} ramdisk fallback, and the @file{/tmp} ramdisk; the root initramfs
and shipped @file{/usr} are read-only.
@item @code{poll}, @code{select}, and @code{nanosleep} are not driven by a
preemptive timer interrupt.  Wall-clock time is seeded from RTC state when
available and then advanced from the TSC.
@item @code{clone} does not offer full Linux thread semantics.
@item @code{/proc} and @code{/sys} are not real filesystems.
@item @code{mprotect} enforces only coarse present/write page permissions; page
fault reporting is still primitive.
@item @code{futex}, @code{sigaltstack}, and @code{set_robust_list} implement
useful state and wait/wake behavior, but not the full Linux threading/runtime
contract.
@item Socket support includes pathname Unix-domain stream sockets and a small
IPv4 stack, but the Internet socket behavior is intentionally narrow and does
not provide complete Linux networking semantics.
@end itemize
