@node Build Script Reference
@appendix Build Script Reference

@cindex build scripts
@cindex packaging scripts
@cindex image builders

@menu
* Script Conventions::
* Package Build Wrappers::
* Image and Media Builders::
* Shared Helper Script::
@end menu

@node Script Conventions
@appendixsec Script Conventions

The scripts in @file{tools/} share several conventions:

@itemize @bullet
@item They are written in Bash with @code{set -euo pipefail}.
@item They validate argument counts explicitly.
@item They tend to compute an absolute repository root based on their own
location.
@item They prefer musl builds through Zig wrappers for upstream packages.
@item They validate final binaries with @code{readelf} when the result is meant
to run inside VibeOS.
@item They use @file{tools/strip_helpers.sh} so stripping can be disabled
centrally.
@end itemize

This shared style is important because the scripts collectively define what kind
of userspace VibeOS supports.

@node Package Build Wrappers
@appendixsec Package Build Wrappers

@table @file
@item tools/build_help.sh
Builds the in-tree @code{help} program with @code{zig cc} targeting
@code{x86_64-linux-musl}.  The resulting binary is static, non-PIE, validated
with @code{readelf}, and then optionally stripped.

@item tools/build_busybox.sh
Builds or reuses BusyBox.  It can consume an upstream source tree, a prebuilt
binary, or a repository-root source tarball.  The script applies VibeOS-specific
configuration choices such as static linking, shell-standalone behavior, and
the removal of Linux assumptions that do not make sense in the current kernel.

@item tools/build_coreutils.sh
Configures and builds GNU coreutils for static musl, stages the installed
programs into a flat directory, and records the installed program names in a
separate text file so later scripts can decide which ones belong in the
initramfs and which belong under @file{/usr}.

@item tools/build_bash.sh
Builds Bash against the musl ncurses tree.  The script prepares a Zig compiler
wrapper, configures Bash to use static linking and curses support, edits the
generated makefiles where needed, and validates the final binary as an amd64
static @code{ET_EXEC}.

@item tools/build_ncurses.sh
Builds a static wide-character ncurses plus a small terminfo tree.  The script
disables shared libraries, X support, tests, and other features that are not
needed for the current VibeOS runtime.

@item tools/build_sl.sh
Builds the upstream @code{sl} novelty program against the VibeOS ncurses build.
It uses a wrapper that explicitly links against the wide-character ncurses and
terminfo libraries.

@item tools/build_file.sh
Builds @code{file(1)} and the compiled @file{magic.mgc} database as static musl
artifacts, disabling optional compression and seccomp dependencies that are not
needed inside the current OS image.

@item tools/build_nano.sh
Builds nano against the VibeOS ncurses tree as a static non-PIE binary.  The
script disables NLS and libmagic support to keep the build aligned with the
current runtime assumptions.

@item tools/build_less.sh
Builds less against the VibeOS ncurses tree as a static non-PIE binary.  It
uses the POSIX regex backend, filters incompatible host linker flags through a
Zig compiler wrapper, and validates that the result has no program
interpreter.

@item tools/build_vim.sh
Builds Vim against the VibeOS ncurses tree as a static non-PIE binary.  It
disables GUI, dynamic-language, terminal, channel, NLS, and optional host
integration features, then stages @file{/usr/bin/vim} plus a trimmed
@file{/usr/share/vim} runtime.

@item tools/build_libpipeline.sh
Builds a static libpipeline sysroot used by man-db, placing 64-bit libraries
and pkg-config metadata under @file{/usr/lib64}.

@item tools/build_gdbm.sh
Builds a static gdbm sysroot used by man-db, placing 64-bit libraries under
@file{/usr/lib64}.

@item tools/build_groff.sh
Builds and stages groff into a tree rooted at @file{/usr}.  The output is later
copied into the ext2 @file{/usr} image so @code{man} has its formatter stack.

@item tools/build_man_pages.sh
Installs the Linux man-pages tree under a staging directory and copies the
result into the VibeOS @file{/usr/share/man} tree.

@item tools/build_man_db.sh
Builds man-db against the static libpipeline and gdbm sysroots plus the staged
groff tree.

@item tools/build_gmp.sh
Builds a static musl GMP sysroot from the configured distfile cache for use by
Nettle and GnuTLS.

@item tools/build_nettle.sh
Builds a static musl Nettle and Hogweed sysroot against the staged GMP sysroot.

@item tools/build_gnutls.sh
Builds a static GnuTLS sysroot against the staged Nettle and GMP sysroots,
using the included libtasn1 and unistring copies and disabling features that are
not needed by the current VibeOS runtime.

@item tools/build_wget.sh
Builds a static non-PIE @code{wget} binary with HTTPS support through GnuTLS,
stages @file{/usr/bin/wget}, writes @file{/usr/etc/wgetrc}, and copies the host
CA bundle into the VibeOS @file{/usr/etc/ssl/certs} tree when available.

@item tools/build_kernel_tests.sh
Builds the in-tree kernel regression tests and helper binary as static non-PIE
musl executables, validates them with @code{readelf}, and stages the test tree
under @file{/usr}.
@end table

@node Image and Media Builders
@appendixsec Image and Media Builders

@table @file
@item tools/make_initramfs.sh
Constructs the root @code{cpio newc} archive.  It creates the root directory
layout, copies BusyBox and essential coreutils into @file{/bin}, writes
@file{/etc/motd}, writes @file{/.bashrc}, generates the @file{/init} launcher,
and creates BusyBox applet symlinks while avoiding applets that should be
provided by GNU coreutils instead.

@item tools/make_usr_ext2.sh
Constructs the read-only @file{/usr} ext3 image.  It copies optional program
trees, stages non-essential coreutils, installs data files such as
@file{magic.mgc}, copies selected terminfo entries including @code{ansi} and
@code{vibeos}, stages @code{wget} runtime configuration and the CA bundle,
estimates the block count, and then runs @code{mkfs.ext3 -d} to create the
filesystem image.

@item tools/make_home_ext2.sh
Constructs the writable @file{/home} ext3 image used by the default QEMU run
path.  The image is currently 64 MiB and labeled @code{VIBEOS_HOME}.

@item tools/make_iso.sh
Creates a temporary ISO tree, copies the kernel and both module images into
@file{/boot}, writes a small GRUB configuration that uses @code{multiboot2} and
two @code{module2} directives, and then runs @code{grub-mkrescue}.

@item tools/make_gpt_disk.sh
Creates a raw disk image, partitions it with GPT, creates a BIOS GRUB partition
plus a main ext3 partition, populates the filesystem off-image, and embeds a
GRUB core image directly.  It does not require mounts, loop devices, or root
privileges.
@end table

@node Shared Helper Script
@appendixsec Shared Helper Script

@table @file
@item tools/strip_helpers.sh
Defines the shared stripping policy used across the build scripts.  It can
resolve the active strip tool, determine whether stripping is enabled, strip a
single ELF binary, or recursively strip staged executable trees.  The
top-level debug targets work largely by overriding the variables consumed by
this helper.
@end table
