@node ISO Size and Contents
@appendix ISO Size and Contents

@cindex ISO size
@cindex image size
@cindex userspace payload
@cindex boot media overhead

This appendix explains why the VibeOS ISO is large, what is actually taking up
space inside it, and how much of that size belongs to VibeOS itself rather than
to bundled third-party software and bootloader payloads.

The short version is simple: the kernel is small, but the shipped image is not
trying to be a tiny bootstrap environment.  Software installation is still
awkward, so the current policy is to ship a broad userland up front and defer
size reduction until the post-boot install story is much better.

The figures below were measured from the current build artifacts in
@file{build/} on 2026-04-23.

@menu
* Why the ISO is Large::
* Top-Level Size Breakdown::
* What Fills usr.ext2::
* How Large the Actual OS Is::
@end menu

@node Why the ISO is Large
@appendixsec Why the ISO is Large

Several different policies contribute to the current image size:

@itemize @bullet
@item VibeOS ships a large userland instead of only a minimal rescue shell.
@item The image includes local documentation, including the manual pages and
the tools required to render and search them.
@item Most userspace programs are built as static
@code{x86_64-linux-musl} binaries.  That is the correct tradeoff for the
current runtime, but it is larger than a shared-library layout.
@item The ISO includes GRUB BIOS and EFI boot payloads, modules, fonts, and
boot images.  Those files are necessary for the boot medium, but they are not
the VibeOS kernel itself.
@item The large userspace payload is stored as an ext2 filesystem image at
@file{/boot/usr.ext2}, so its on-disk size includes ext2 metadata and 4 KiB
block-allocation rounding overhead in addition to the raw file contents.
@end itemize

The practical reason is user convenience.  Until package installation is
smoother, the project prefers shipping a system that is immediately useful over
shipping a small base image that requires users to install a large fraction of
their tools right after first boot.

@node Top-Level Size Breakdown
@appendixsec Top-Level Size Breakdown

The current bootable ISO is @code{115,265,536} bytes, or about
@code{109.93 MiB}.

The major pieces are:

@table @asis
@item @file{build/vibeos.iso}: 109.93 MiB
The full bootable ISO image.

@item @file{/boot/usr.ext2}: 75.24 MiB
The main userspace payload.  This is by far the largest VibeOS-specific image
artifact placed into the ISO.

@item GRUB and EFI boot payload: 28.91 MiB
This includes the GRUB module trees, fonts, BIOS and EFI support files, and the
embedded EFI image that @code{grub-mkrescue} places into the ISO.

@item @file{/boot/initramfs.cpio}: 3.72 MiB
The early root filesystem used to boot into a shell and mount the separate
@file{/usr} image.

@item @file{/boot/vibeos-kernel.bin}: 0.12 MiB
The kernel itself.
@end table

The important point is that the kernel is not what makes the ISO large.  The
dominant costs are the shipped userspace in @file{/boot/usr.ext2} and the boot
media payload generated by GRUB.

@node What Fills usr.ext2
@appendixsec What Fills usr.ext2

The @file{/boot/usr.ext2} image is where most of the payload lives.  The
largest contributors copied into that image are:

@table @asis
@item @code{groff}: 33.34 MiB
This is the single largest packaged component.  It is present so that manual
pages can be rendered locally.

@item @code{file-magic.mgc}: 10.16 MiB
The compiled magic database used by the @code{file} command.

@item GNU @code{coreutils}: 9.46 MiB
The full set of standalone command-line tools staged into @file{/usr/bin}.

@item Linux @code{man-pages}: 7.46 MiB
The local manual page corpus.  The current staged tree contains 3,092 manual
page files.

@item @code{bash}: 3.21 MiB
The interactive shell.

@item @code{man-db}: 2.10 MiB
The @code{man} runtime and helper programs.

@item Smaller utilities
@code{nano} is about 0.55 MiB, @code{sl} about 0.24 MiB, and @code{file} about
0.23 MiB.
@end table

The copied userspace payload totals about @code{68.19 MiB} before filesystem
image overhead.  The ext2 image itself is @code{75.24 MiB}, so about
@code{7.05 MiB} is not file contents but ext2 bookkeeping and block rounding.

The documentation stack is the single largest category.  Taken together,
@code{groff}, @code{man-pages}, and @code{man-db} consume about
@code{42.90 MiB}.  That is deliberate: the current system is trying to be
self-contained, not merely bootable.

@node How Large the Actual OS Is
@appendixsec How Large the Actual OS Is

There are two defensible answers to ``how large is the actual OS?'', depending
on whether the question means ``how much VibeOS-authored code is on the image''
or ``how much is required to boot into a usable shell''.

@table @asis
@item VibeOS-authored compiled code: about 125 KiB
The compiled in-tree VibeOS-specific binaries currently consist of
@file{build/vibeos-kernel.bin} at @code{123,832} bytes and
@file{build/userspace/help} at @code{3,968} bytes, for a combined total of
about @code{127,800} bytes.  There are also a few tiny VibeOS-authored text and
configuration files such as @file{/init}, @file{/etc/motd}, @file{.bashrc}, and
@file{boot/grub/grub.cfg}, but they are negligible in size.

@item Bootable base system: about 3.84 MiB
If the question is instead ``how much is needed to boot into a usable shell'',
then the kernel plus initramfs is the right measure.  The kernel is about
@code{0.12 MiB} and the initramfs about @code{3.72 MiB}, for a combined base of
about @code{3.84 MiB}.
@end table

Even that base system is mostly third-party payload rather than VibeOS code:

@itemize @bullet
@item BusyBox in the initramfs is about @code{1.13 MiB}.
@item The essential static GNU coreutils copied into the initramfs account for
about @code{2.57 MiB}.
@end itemize

So the actual VibeOS-authored portion of the shipped runtime is very small.
What makes the ISO large is the deliberate choice to bundle a broad, useful
userspace and its documentation until software installation becomes much less
annoying.
