@node Known Limitations
@appendix Known Limitations

@cindex limitations
@cindex missing features
@cindex compatibility gaps

This appendix records the major architectural and compatibility limits visible
in the current source tree.

@menu
* Kernel and Scheduler Limits::
* Filesystem and Namespace Limits::
* ABI and Compatibility Limits::
* Toolchain and Userspace Limits::
@end menu

@node Kernel and Scheduler Limits
@appendixsec Kernel and Scheduler Limits

The scheduler is cooperative in practice.  There is no periodic timer interrupt
and no preemptive multitasking.

Related consequences include:

@itemize @bullet
@item CPU-bound programs do not lose the processor unless they enter the kernel
through syscalls.
@item Sleep and readiness waiting rely on polling and saved syscall context.
@item Timekeeping is synthetic rather than driven by a real wall-clock source.
@end itemize

Exception handling is also intentionally simple: kernel exceptions are reported
and then the machine halts.

@node Filesystem and Namespace Limits
@appendixsec Filesystem and Namespace Limits

The root initramfs and shipped @file{/usr} image are read-only.  @file{/home}
is writable when backed by the default SCSI ext3 image, and falls back to a
volatile writable ramdisk if no home disk is attached.  @file{/tmp} is always
backed by a volatile writable ramdisk.

The namespace can expose files, directories, symlinks, pipes, pathname
Unix-domain socket nodes, TTYs, a null device, and possibly a framebuffer
device, but it does not yet provide:

@itemize @bullet
@item writable persistent filesystems outside the fixed @file{/home} mount,
@item a real procfs implementation,
@item a real sysfs implementation,
@item device discovery beyond the hardcoded synthetic devices, or
@item dynamic mounting and unmounting.
@end itemize

@node ABI and Compatibility Limits
@appendixsec ABI and Compatibility Limits

The userspace ABI is Linux-like, not Linux-complete.

Known gaps include:

@itemize @bullet
@item partial syscall coverage for features such as full @code{futex},
@code{prctl}, alternate-signal-stack delivery, and robust-list semantics,
@item no real @code{rseq},
@item partial signal semantics,
@item restricted @code{clone} behavior,
@item limited @code{statx} behavior,
@item networking limited to a small virtio-net IPv4 stack with ARP, DHCP, UDP,
client-side TCP streams, and raw ICMP rather than a complete Linux network
implementation,
@item no real thread implementation,
@item no writable shared-library runtime staging, and
@item synthetic handling of @file{/proc/self/exe}.
@end itemize

The presence of @code{PT_INTERP} support in the loader should not be mistaken
for mature dynamic-linker support across the whole runtime.

@node Toolchain and Userspace Limits
@appendixsec Toolchain and Userspace Limits

The packaging scripts intentionally target static musl binaries because that is
the path the current loader and runtime are designed around.

Consequences include:

@itemize @bullet
@item glibc-oriented dynamic builds are not first-class targets,
@item packages may be configured with optional features disabled to fit the
current kernel, and
@item targeted compatibility shims may still be used where a full dependency
port does not yet exist.
@end itemize

These are acceptable tradeoffs for the current prototype, but they are still
real limits and should be understood before attempting to broaden the userland.
