@node Source File Map
@appendix Source File Map

@cindex source file map
@cindex file map
@cindex code map

This appendix maps every in-tree source or build file that materially
contributes to the OS.

@menu
* Top-Level Files::
* Kernel Boot Files::
* Kernel Header Files::
* Kernel Source Files::
* In-Tree Userspace Files::
* Tool Script Files::
* Documentation Source Files::
@end menu

@node Top-Level Files
@appendixsec Top-Level Files

@table @file
@item Makefile
Root build graph for the kernel, packaged userspace, disk and ISO images, QEMU
launch, and documentation generation.

@item README.md
Short human-readable overview of the project.

@item .gitignore
Repository ignore rules, including generated build and documentation outputs.
@end table

@node Kernel Boot Files
@appendixsec Kernel Boot Files

@table @file
@item kernel/linker.ld
Kernel linker script.

@item kernel/boot/boot.asm
Multiboot2 header, early paging setup, long-mode transition, and handoff to
@code{kernel_main}.

@item kernel/boot/interrupts.asm
Assembly helpers for loading the GDT and IDT, syscall entry, user-mode entry
and exit, and exception stubs.
@end table

@node Kernel Header Files
@appendixsec Kernel Header Files

@table @file
@item kernel/include/common.h
Small shared macros and reboot command constants.

@item kernel/include/console.h
Console API and framebuffer information structure.

@item kernel/include/console_font.h
Built-in console font dimensions and glyph table declaration.

@item kernel/include/ext2.h
Public interface of the ext2/ext3 backend.  The file keeps its historical name
even though the implementation now supports both formats.

@item kernel/include/fs.h
VFS-level path, mode, backend, and lookup interfaces.

@item kernel/include/gdt.h
GDT and TSS loader interface.

@item kernel/include/idt.h
IDT initialization interface.

@item kernel/include/initramfs.h
Initramfs entry representation and lookup interface.

@item kernel/include/input.h
Combined serial and keyboard input interface.

@item kernel/include/io.h
Inline x86 port-I/O, MSR, control-register, TSC, and FS-base helpers.

@item kernel/include/keyboard.h
Keyboard polling interface and combo-signal enumeration.

@item kernel/include/kmalloc.h
Kernel heap allocator interface.

@item kernel/include/multiboot2.h
Multiboot2 tag structures and lookup helpers used by the kernel.

@item kernel/include/pci.h
PCI configuration-space scanning interface used by virtio device discovery.

@item kernel/include/scsi.h
SCSI command helpers and block-storage operation interfaces.

@item kernel/include/ata.h
ATA and ATAPI probing plus storage-operation interfaces.

@item kernel/include/power.h
ACPI and machine power-control interface.

@item kernel/include/process.h
Process table types, wait-state metadata, signal handler metadata, and process
management interfaces.

@item kernel/include/serial.h
Serial console interface.

@item kernel/include/string.h
Kernel-private memory and string routines.

@item kernel/include/syscall.h
Saved syscall-frame layout and syscall entry API.

@item kernel/include/userland.h
Bootstrap userland loader interface.

@item kernel/include/vm.h
User VM layout constants and VM-space interfaces.

@item kernel/include/virtio_gpu.h
Virtio GPU discovery and framebuffer setup interface.

@item kernel/include/virtio_scsi.h
Virtio SCSI discovery and disk-access interface.
@end table

@node Kernel Source Files
@appendixsec Kernel Source Files

@table @file
@item kernel/src/main.c
Top-level kernel startup and shell-launch policy.

@item kernel/src/multiboot2.c
Multiboot2 tag scanning helpers for modules, ACPI tables, and framebuffer
information.

@item kernel/src/console.c
Main console implementation, ANSI handling, framebuffer rendering, and text-cell
model.

@item kernel/src/console_font.c
Built-in 12x25 bitmap font table.

@item kernel/src/serial.c
COM1 initialization and polled serial I/O.

@item kernel/src/input.c
Input multiplexer over serial and keyboard.

@item kernel/src/keyboard.c
Polled PS/2 keyboard scancode translator.

@item kernel/src/pci.c
Minimal PCI bus scanner used to find virtio devices.

@item kernel/src/ata.c
ATA disk and ATAPI packet-device probing, with storage adapters for mounted
filesystem images.

@item kernel/src/scsi.c
Shared SCSI command helpers used by ATAPI and virtio SCSI devices.

@item kernel/src/virtio_gpu.c
Virtio GPU setup for framebuffer-backed console output.

@item kernel/src/virtio_scsi.c
Virtio SCSI setup and disk I/O for @file{/usr} and @file{/home} images.

@item kernel/src/power.c
ACPI parsing and machine halt, reboot, and shutdown logic.

@item kernel/src/gdt.c
Runtime GDT, TSS, and kernel-stack setup.

@item kernel/src/idt.c
IDT construction and vector installation.

@item kernel/src/exceptions.c
Exception report printer.

@item kernel/src/kmalloc.c
Kernel heap allocator.

@item kernel/src/vm.c
Kernel and per-process page-table management.

@item kernel/src/initramfs.c
Read-only initramfs parser and entry indexer.

@item kernel/src/ext2.c
Ext2/ext3 filesystem implementation used for the @file{/usr} and @file{/home}
mounts.  The file keeps its historical name even though the implementation now
supports both formats.

@item kernel/src/fs.c
VFS dispatcher over initramfs and the ext2/ext3 backend.

@item kernel/src/process.c
Process table allocator, lookup, and pending-signal bookkeeping.

@item kernel/src/userland.c
Bootstrap ELF loader and initial shell launcher.

@item kernel/src/syscall.c
The main syscall subsystem: descriptor model, path resolution, pipes, waiting,
signals, scheduling, exec, fork-like calls, and syscall dispatch.

@item kernel/src/string.c
Kernel-local @code{memcpy}, @code{memmove}, @code{strlen}, and related helper
implementations.
@end table

@node In-Tree Userspace Files
@appendixsec In-Tree Userspace Files

@table @file
@item userspace/help.c
Curated quick-start helper program staged into @file{/usr/bin/help}.

@item tests/kernel-tests.c
Static userspace regression test runner staged into @file{/usr/bin}.

@item tests/kernel-test-helper.c
Helper executable used by the regression tests for exec and descriptor
inheritance checks.
@end table

@node Tool Script Files
@appendixsec Tool Script Files

@table @file
@item tools/build_help.sh
Build the in-tree @code{help} program.

@item tools/build_busybox.sh
Build or reuse BusyBox for the VibeOS root image.

@item tools/build_coreutils.sh
Build and stage GNU coreutils.

@item tools/build_bash.sh
Build and stage Bash.

@item tools/build_ncurses.sh
Build a static wide-character ncurses.

@item tools/build_sl.sh
Build and stage @code{sl}.

@item tools/build_file.sh
Build and stage @code{file(1)} and @file{magic.mgc}.

@item tools/build_nano.sh
Build and stage nano.

@item tools/build_less.sh
Build and stage less.

@item tools/build_libpipeline.sh
Build and stage libpipeline.

@item tools/build_gdbm.sh
Build and stage gdbm.

@item tools/build_groff.sh
Build and stage groff.

@item tools/build_man_pages.sh
Stage Linux man-pages.

@item tools/build_man_db.sh
Build and stage man-db.

@item tools/build_kernel_tests.sh
Build and stage the in-tree kernel regression tests.

@item tools/make_initramfs.sh
Create the initramfs root archive.

@item tools/make_usr_ext2.sh
Create the ext3 @file{/usr} image.

@item tools/make_home_ext2.sh
Create the ext3 @file{/home} image.

@item tools/make_iso.sh
Create the bootable ISO image.

@item tools/make_gpt_disk.sh
Create the BIOS plus GPT raw disk image.

@item tools/strip_helpers.sh
Shared stripping helper functions.
@end table

@node Documentation Source Files
@appendixsec Documentation Source Files

@table @file
@item docs/vibeos.texi
Top-level Texinfo manual file that includes the chapter and appendix sources.

@item docs/chapters/*.texi
Main body chapters for architecture, build, runtime, and ABI documentation.

@item docs/appendices/*.texi
Reference appendices for scripts, file maps, constants, and limitations.
@end table
