.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.TH intro 2 2026-07-10 "VibeOS System Calls"
.SH NAME
intro \- introduction to VibeOS system calls
.SH DESCRIPTION
Section 2 documents the system-call interface exposed by VibeOS.
VibeOS uses the Linux x86-64 syscall numbers and calling convention so that
statically linked musl programs can run without a VibeOS-specific C library.
It is not Linux, and compatibility is intentionally incomplete.
.PP
Applications normally call the musl C library wrappers rather than entering
the kernel directly.  A raw call places the syscall number in
.BR rax ,
arguments in
.BR rdi ,
.BR rsi ,
.BR rdx ,
.BR r10 ,
.BR r8 ,
and
.BR r9 ,
and executes the
.B syscall
instruction.  The legacy
.B int $0x80
entry path is also present.
.PP
The kernel returns a nonnegative result on success or a negated errno value on
failure.  C library wrappers translate a negative result to \-1 and set
.IR errno .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
Only calls listed by
.BR syscalls (2)
are recognized.  Even for those calls, optional Linux flags, ioctl commands,
address families, filesystems, and process semantics may not exist.  Programs
should handle
.BR ENOSYS ,
.BR EINVAL ,
and
.BR ENOTSUP
where a Linux program might assume an extension is available.
.PP
The other pages in section 2 are retained from the Linux man-pages project as
API references and carry a VibeOS compatibility notice.  Their Linux-specific
details are not a promise of VibeOS behavior.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR syscall (2),
.BR syscalls (2),
.BR errno (3),
.BR vibeos (7)
