\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename vibeos.info
@settitle VibeOS Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifnottex
@dircategory Operating Systems
@direntry
* VibeOS: (vibeos). GNU-style manual for the VibeOS kernel, runtime, and build system.
@end direntry
@end ifnottex

@copying
This manual documents the in-tree parts of VibeOS as they exist in this
repository.

The manual covers the kernel, the in-tree userspace helper program, the image
construction pipeline, the top-level build rules, and the way VibeOS integrates
upstream packages.  It does not try to replace the manuals shipped by upstream
projects inside @file{external/}; instead, it documents the VibeOS-specific
policy, staging, and compatibility behavior around them.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title VibeOS Manual
@subtitle Architecture, Runtime Behavior, Build Pipeline, and Source Reference
@author VibeOS contributors

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top VibeOS Manual

VibeOS is an amd64 monolithic kernel prototype that boots through Multiboot2,
switches itself into long mode, mounts a read-only initramfs root and a
read-only ext2 @file{/usr} image, and runs a Linux-ABI userspace built mostly
from static musl binaries.

The repository has two standing policy constraints that shape almost every part
of the system:

@itemize @bullet
@item The dynamic loader path exists, but it is still considered buggy in
practice.  Static linking is preferred unless it is impossible.
@item Musl is preferred over glibc when possible, and the build wrappers use
@code{zig cc} or @code{zig c++} with @code{x86_64-linux-musl} targets for most
userspace packages.
@end itemize

This manual is written in GNU Texinfo style and is split into many source files
so that the overall system reference can grow without collapsing into a single
monolithic document.

@menu
* Overview::
* Source Layout::
* Building VibeOS::
* Boot and Initialization::
* Console and Devices::
* Memory Management::
* Filesystems and Namespace::
* Processes and Signals::
* Program Loading and Userspace::
* System Call Interface::
* Hacking on VibeOS::
* Build Script Reference::
* Source File Map::
* Configuration Constants and Limits::
* Known Limitations::
* Indexes::
@end menu

@include chapters/overview.texi
@include chapters/source-layout.texi
@include chapters/building.texi
@include chapters/boot.texi
@include chapters/console-devices-power.texi
@include chapters/memory.texi
@include chapters/filesystems.texi
@include chapters/processes.texi
@include chapters/program-loading.texi
@include chapters/syscalls.texi
@include chapters/hacking.texi
@include appendices/build-scripts.texi
@include appendices/source-file-map.texi
@include appendices/constants-and-limits.texi
@include appendices/known-limitations.texi

@node Indexes
@unnumbered Indexes

@menu
* Concept Index::
* Function Index::
* Variable Index::
@end menu

@node Concept Index
@unnumberedsec Concept Index
@printindex cp

@node Function Index
@unnumberedsec Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@unnumberedsec Variable Index
@printindex vr

@bye
